# This Website

This post focuses on the website that you're currently reading this post on: my own portfolio website. This is the website that I created to let people know a little more about my professional self, display the projects that I've completed, and blog about various front-end development topics. I figured that if I wanted to get hired as a front-end developer, I at least need to build my own website to show that I can build websites.

I want to mention at the outset that I'm not a designer. I have an amateur sense of what looks good and bad and what constitutes a good or bad user experience, but I'm not trained in that area. Nevertheless, I wanted to produced something on my own that at least doesn't look bad. And I think that I accomplished that. I also had a few more goals for the web site. I wanted to create something that was mobile-friendly and that incorporated some accessibility considerations.

I created the website using React and create-react-app. This is a very easy and fast way to get started developing a website. I used react-router-dom to handle routes. On my website, readers can view lots of blog posts. The blog posts were created as markdown files and converted to html using 'react-markdown.' Most blog posts include code snippets. I wanted to javascript code to be colored in different ways depending on the syntax type. This was done with the help of 'react-syntax-highlighter.'

This site had only a front-end component. The markdown files were stored in a separate file directory rather than in a database. I created a json file that had attributes of each of the files, including the tile, date it was created, and a brief description of the contents of the file. The json file is included as source code so it is automatically downloaded when the user visits the site. So when the user visits the 'Blog' portion of the website, the contents of the json file are used to create a list of links to each of the blog posts.

For styling, I used a attempted to use a mobile-first approach. This first assumes that the website is being displayed on a small screen and then uses media queries to adjust the layout if the screen is larger. A blog website does not involve very complicated layouts, so this was not a very complicated task. As far as accessibility, . . . (INCLUDE MORE STUFF HERE).

The main challenge in creating the site was figuring out what I thought looks good. I had to do a lot of research on the designs of other developers. There are a lot of sites out there that look cool but are too flashy and overstimulating. I like things clean, simple, and to the point.

In the future, I would like to expand the capabilities of the website in two ways. I would like to add tags to each of the blog posts and allow readers to filter the posts by tag. I would also like to make it possible for users to make comments on specific blog posts. This, of course, would require back end support. So my next task is learn some back end development!
